Abstract— 
Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is human eye illness which occurs in individuals who have diabetics
which harms their retina and in the long run, may lead visual deficiency.Diabetic Retinopathy
is regarded as the leading cause of blindness for diabetic patients, especially the working-age population. 
Early detection of Diabetic Retinopathy is crucial in order to sustain the patient’s vision
effectively. The main issue involved with DR detection is that the manual diagnosis process is very time,
money, and effort consuming and involves an ophthalmologist’s examination of eye retinal fundus images.
The latter also proves to be more difficult, particularly in the early stages of the disease when disease features
are less prominent in the images. Till now DR is being screened 
manually by ophthalmologist which is a very time consuming procedure. And henceforth this task (project)
focuses on analysis of different DR stages, which is done with Deep Learning (DL) and it is a subset of Artificial
Intelligence (AI). We trained a CNN model on an enormous dataset including more than 5000 train images to
automatically detect the DR stage. The Dataset which are using is classified into five DR stages, 
which are 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.



Keywords— Diabetic Retinopathy (DR), Deep Learning, CNN Architecture, Dataset, Eye Blindness 



Introduction: 
Diabetes serves as the most prominent reason for blindness for people under the age of 50 years. 
Diabetes Mellitus is a direct cause of Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) which is a complication of diabetes where glucose 
blocks blood vessels that feed the eye and causes swelling and leaking of blood or fluids that can cause severe
eye injury. The detrimental vision loss due to DR occurs primarily when there is retina central swelling.
In recent projects and researches, AI models, and in AI specially “Deep Learning” gives the most accurate outputs in
finding hidden layers in various AI tasks, particularly in the field of medical image analysis.
Convolutional Neural Networks are specialized neural networks mainly used for image recognition and classification.
In this paper, we propose a model that would carry out two kinds of classifications of fundus images.
 First is the binary classification into normal and DR affected, and second is a 5 level classification
into normal, mild DR, moderate DR, severe DR and proliferative DR.
The clinicians are divided these DR into five classes
which shows the stages of DR :
x No DR (class 0)
x Mild DR (class 1)
x Moderate DR (class 2)
x Sever DR (class 4)
x Proliferative DR (class 5)